Foreign
[Music] I'm Norman Wildberger. We're setting
out a new foundation for arithmetic and algebra,
in fact, mathematics more generally, based
on multi-sets and thinking about numbers and
polynomials and consequent algebra, all built in
terms of these multi-sets. A key sort of novelty
in this approach is that we end up having to
adopt some of the 20th-century physicists'
ideas having to do with particle-antiparticle
duality to create a theory of negative numbers.
So we've done that, and now we're in a position
to reap some of the very important consequences.
I'm aspiring here not just to create a new
foundation for the subject but also to position us
in a way that we can see things in a
new light. You're going to see that
happening very strongly today. We're going to
be looking at polynomials with a new point of
view that will open up all kinds of interesting
developments, and in fact, it will turn out that
we will end up being able to reinterpret
some very important 20th-century physics
developments in terms of this very elementary
algebra. So we're heading in that direction.
Okay, so we're going to be talking about integral
polynomials. Let me remind you that a poly number
itself is an mset of natural numbers. For
example, here there's an mset of natural
numbers interpreted as 2 plus alpha plus 3 alpha
to the 4, and here's our usual convention in
the algebraic calculus course, for example, for
expressing such a poly number. Now somewhat novel,
an integral poly number is an mset of integers
now, so that includes not just natural numbers
like this but also negative numbers. I like to
often express negative numbers with the natural
numbers with a bar over them, so this is minus
three, that's minus three, that's minus one,
etc. Now this corresponds on the polynomial side,
in terms of powers of alpha, to the following:
this is really two, there's two of these alpha
to the minus three or three bar, there is a
single alpha to the one bar or alpha to the minus
one, there's a one, and then there's three alpha.
Perhaps more usually, if we sort of adopt the
usual convention for negative signs, in a more
familiar way it would be 2 alpha to the minus 3
plus alpha to the minus 1 plus 1 plus 3 alpha. So
in algebra, this is not a polynomial because there
are negative powers of the variable appearing,
sometimes called a Laurent polynomial or
sometimes a rational function. In any case,
we are going to augment this notation, make it a
little bit bigger, to allow us to incorporate also
coefficients of negative powers of
alpha in sort of an obvious way,
but we're going to have a little bit of an
addition now. So the one plus three alpha will
be represented by the one here and the three, so
this would be the usual poly number story. What
I'm now going to do is include the coefficients
of alpha to the minus one, alpha to the minus 2,
alpha to the minus 3 up above here, and now
there's a sort of a symmetry here which will
become very important in this lecture. There's
a symmetry here where this central object,
which is the coefficient of just the constant
term, sort of plays a central role now. The
strictly positive and strictly negative ones are
on either side of it, and so to make that clear,
I'm going to put a double bar there. So those two
bars are going to frame the constant term or the
alpha to the zero coefficient. All right,
so that's what an integral poly number is,
and we're going to be seeing some
interesting things about these things today.
Now, we particularly like doing arithmetic in the
domain of integers, so we're also going to allow
ourselves to consider integers as coefficients of
our powers of alpha, and that manifests itself in
having anti-integers inside our mset defining the
poly number or the integral poly number. So have
a look at this thing here: this is an ordinary
poly number with natural number entries here,
but some of them have antis. So there's a
zero anti-zero anti-one, one, one, three,
anti, and these two zero antis are representing
the number minus two. So if we just had an mset
zero anti-zero anti or anti-zero anti-zero, that
would be the number minus two or two bar. There
are still three alphas here, represented by these
three ones, and there's a single alpha cubed,
but there's an anti here, so we have to take
minus that. So in conventional notation with
the more usual conventions, this would be
minus two plus three alpha minus alpha cubed.
So that's a poly number, but now we can combine
these two different roles of integers here and
consider integral poly numbers also with integer
coefficients. So that means that inside here we
have integers, not just natural numbers but also
negative numbers like negative one and negative
two, etc., but we also have antis. So this is
a two bar, anti-one bar, anti-one bar, anti.
It corresponds to this two bar, corresponds to
alpha to the minus two or alpha, it's the two bar,
but the anti means that there's minus one of
them. So there's a minus one or minus alpha
to the minus two represented by that thing
there. There's two of these one bar antis,
so the one bar is telling us that we're
talking about alpha to the minus one,
and the antis representing the fact that we
don't have two of them, we have minus two of
them. So minus two alpha to the minus one or,
in more legally, plus two bar alpha one bar,
and then there's a zero that represents one, and
these three twos give us three alpha squared.
So if we want the usual notation for negative
numbers, we could also rewrite the mset. Instead
of having two bar, we could write minus two, so
instead of the one bar we could write minus one,
etc. So it amounts to the same thing, but
there's a lot of negatives here, and there
is definitely the possibility of confusion here
with this minus sign. The minus sign being here,
even though it's very familiar, it's in the place
where an operation usually is. So there's an
operation sign there, and it looks like there's
an operation sign here, but you have to sort of
interpret that the operation sign is not really
an operation sign; it's rather negating the two.
So this is not really optimal notation, so gently
I want to move you a little bit towards something
more in this direction where the operations
and the negations are more clearly delineated.
Now when we're doing calculus or analysis,
there is a big difference between the world of
polynomials and the world of rational functions,
what we're calling the difference between
polynomials and integral polynumbers. So that's
what you get when you view all these things as
functions. In 20th-century mathematics, the idea
of a function was all-pervasive. A lot of things
were attempted to be framed in terms of functions,
a rule that assigns something of a certain kind as
input and then gives you an output of some other
potentially different kind. So in my view, this
sort of active role of functions is overplayed.
It's too frequent a concept in modern mathematics,
and it leads to a lot of confusion because this
dynamic aspect of taking an input and doing
something to get an output necessarily really
involves a deep dive into computational issues,
issues of programming, issues of computation,
issues then correspondingly of memory and
language, etc. So I'm going to strongly advocate
to you that you should not think about polynomials
or poly numbers or integral polynomials as
functions primarily. If you're an undergraduate
and have done a mathematics degree, this will
be sort of so ingrained into your thinking
that it will be a bit of a challenge to move
back from that, but it has a lot of benefits.
Okay, so the usual story, let's look at it with
a distinction between these two examples. So
here is a poly number on this side, and here's an
integral poly number. This one is 0, 1, anti-3,
3, corresponding to the polynomial 1 minus alpha
plus two alpha cubed in the usual notation. Here,
there's a kind of a negation of this in some
sense, so we're sort of replacing each of the
numbers here with their negatives. So we have a
three bar, three bar, a one bar, anti, and a zero,
and that corresponds to the integral poly number
2 times alpha to the minus 3 minus alpha to the
minus 1 plus 1. Now in a calculus course or an
analysis course, you would look at these things
in terms of functions. You'd say, aha, this thing
here really represents a function, say y equals P
of x given by this polynomial. So you input x and
you output y, and correspondingly this thing here
is also a function, 2 over x cubed minus 1 over
x plus one. You input x, you output y. But in
the world of functions, these things are hugely
different for one obvious reason: as a function,
this thing here with the x in the denominator
requires you to avoid an input of zero. Because
if you put in zero here, it doesn't give you
anything that's defined. So the domain of this
thing is automatically different from the domain
of this, but also visually, in terms of a graph,
they are very different kinds of objects. There's
a graph of this thing here, a sort of familiar
cubic kind of shape, and here is perhaps less
familiar, somewhat hyperbolic shape with this
singularity at x equals zero represented by
these two branches that go up and down here.
So a manifestation of the huge difference
between these two things is when we come to the
fundamental question of integration in calculus.
Now if you say integrate this thing from, say, one
to two over this interval here, the area of that
turns out to be exactly seven. That's an exact
calculation. Well, over here the corresponding
integral from one to two of this function turns
out, if I ask my computer, it's 7 over 4 minus
log 2. It's a standard integral that high school
students or undergraduates learn to do. Now we say
this answer here rather glibly, but really this
answer is a hugely computationally problematic
because this log 2 here represents a process which
doesn't actually terminate, so you can't actually
compute it. So the question about whether there is
an "it" that we're legitimately talking about here
is highly questionable. If you ask your computer,
well, it'll just spew out some number of digits,
but it's clear that you're not able to really
obtain this thing exactly. So it's important
to state, as I've done in many places, this
thing over here is intrinsically an approximate
calculation, while this one over here is exact.
So there is a world of difference between
these two computations. This is really
applied mathematics, and over here this is pure
mathematics. Moreover, in the algebraic calculus
course, we learn that we can do this kind of
integral without any of the infinite machinery
that's used in classical calculus or analysis
courses, in terms of Riemann integration, in terms
of setting up Riemann sums and subdividing things
and having rectangles and upper and lower bounds,
etc., and then taking some limit as the net or
the size of the rectangles goes to zero. We can
completely avoid that and stay completely
in a purely polynomial, purely finite sort
of calculating algebraic situation. So that's
a big departure from the usual calculus story
found in the algebraic calculus course lectures
over on the Wild Egg Mathematics channel. So
this really is an exact theory. We do not need
Riemann integration or Lebesgue integration,
absolutely not. We can address this kind
of integral in a completely algebraic way,
but this thing here is necessarily approximate.
You can see that from the calculus
point of view, there is in fact, yes,
a huge difference between this object and this
object, especially when we view them as functions.
But I'm going to ask you here, because
we're doing arithmetic, we're doing algebra,
to step back from this calculus orientation,
calculus over there, and look in this direction
rather at algebra. When we're just looking at
the algebraic side, the distinction between these
two things is much less obvious. In fact, they're
actually very close to being sort of symmetrical.
So we're taking an algebraic approach; we're
letting go of the function concept. How then
are we to interpret what the meaning of these
poly numbers are, whether they're poly numbers
or integral poly numbers? Let me give you an
alternate way of thinking about what these
things are or at least how to interpret them
in a kind of a visual or a physical fashion.
Actually, the question of what they are
is already contained in the definition:
they are just multi-sets of natural numbers
or multi-sets of integers. That's what they
actually are. But now the question is, how do we
think about them? So here is what I'm proposing:
that we're going to think about these things as
densities or measures. It's like we have a number
line, and it's actually sort of a discrete
number line for us currently. So, you know,
imagine the natural numbers sort of strung out
on a line here: there's zero, there's one, we'd
mark these things, there's two, three, etc. We're
going to think about a poly number like this one,
2 minus alpha plus 3 alpha to the fourth, as being
a bunch of weights which are positioned over these
various natural number positions. The weights can
be bigger or they can be smaller, they can also
be negative, corresponding to sort of like, you
know, an upward force instead of a downward force.
It's like a density or a measure. So this thing
here, 2 minus alpha plus 3 alpha to the fourth,
it's going to be represented physically or
visually by this mass distribution. So the way you
should think about this, here's the number line,
and you see here there's a kind of a stack of two
things. So think of this as like a unit weight of
some kind, a little metal bar perhaps. So there's
two of them stacked up on top of zero, that's
corresponding to that two. Down here there's sort
of one in the negative direction, corresponding to
a negative force, so it's down in that direction,
that's corresponding to the minus alpha. Over
here there's three of them over the four, that's
corresponding to three alpha to the four. Having
done that, the transition to an integral poly
number or an I-poly is not hard. We're just going
to extend this story where now the base number
line goes into two directions. Now zero is in
the middle there somewhere, and one is over here,
and two is there, and over on this side minus one,
minus two, etc. So it extends in this direction as
well as this direction. So now we have more room
to put weights, positive or negative. That's all
we're doing, we're just extending the number line
from sort of a one-sided discrete framework to a
two-sided discrete framework. So this thing
here, alpha to the minus three, minus three
alpha to the minus two, plus four, plus alpha
squared, there it's represented. So there's an
alpha to the minus three represented by this point
here, minus three on our number line, and there is
a weight of one because there's one of these.
Then over minus two or under minus two there's
a weight of three because it's minus three alpha
to the minus two. Over zero there's four, that's
representing that thing, and over the two there's
just a single one representing the alpha squared.
So this is visualized as a density or measure on
the positive number line, essentially a discrete
number line indexed by natural numbers, while
this one over here is visualized as a density
or measure on the entire two-sided number line,
which is again discrete and labeled by integers.
So in this sort of continuum here, or this sort
of step-by-step, there are also more elaborate
algebraic objects, also built from poly numbers
in a natural way, called rational functions,
which are just quotients of poly numbers. That
is a bigger theory in some sense. You can,
of course, think about these things as
being sort of special cases of this,
but we should just be aware that further on
down the road we do ultimately want to talk
about these things as well. From the calculus
point of view, these things are even much more
complicated and sophisticated than the problems
that we get with the I-poly and the 1 over x.
The complexity is massively bigger. That's not
properly understood in most calculus courses.
But we're sticking here with this framework. Now
we have a somewhat balanced point of view on how
to think about what poly numbers are, how to
think about what integral poly numbers are,
and they're pretty well the same kinds
of things, just over different domains.
Let me explain how you should think about the
arithmetic of these integral poly numbers with
this sort of density or measure point of view.
The addition is pretty easy. Here's an example:
p is alpha to the minus two plus one plus two
alpha, alpha to the minus two, that weight,
the one over the zero, and the two stacked on
top of the one representing two alpha. Over here
is another one, minus two alpha to the minus
one, so weight of minus two at minus one and
a weight of one at one. If we add these things,
what we do is we just add the two densities,
we just combine them in the obvious way. So if we
combine these two things, there's the number line,
so that density is coming from there, that one's
coming from there, and two of these are coming
from there. Then when we add this one, we have
to put this 2 down here under the minus one,
and we have to put another one on top of the one,
so we get this picture here, which corresponds to
the polynomial alpha to the minus two minus two
alpha to the minus one plus one plus three alpha.
Now the multiplication, however, is more
complicated and more interesting and corresponds
to what's called in measure theory convolution.
This convolution of these two measures,
let me try to illustrate what's going on here.
Here's the result that we get just by doing the
algebraic product. The way we do it visually
is we say, okay, what we're going to do is
we're going to take this thing here, think of this
thing as a fixed mass distribution which is sort
of centered at zero. It's centered at zero, fixed
mass distribution, and we're going to put various
copies down of it in various positions to make
a cumulative mass distribution. The places where
those copies go and the sizes of the contributions
are determined by this one. Let me illustrate that
here. Over here, there is a one at minus two.
That's a minus two. What I'm going to do is
I'm going to move over here so that I'm sort of
centered at minus two temporarily, and I'm going
to put a copy of this thing, which is currently
centered at zero. Just imagine copying it down
here. So I'm not going to, maybe I'm not going to
write the bars, I'm just going to go like this,
representing that minus 2 there. That's sort
of one over from where we're centered here. So
we've put that one there, and there's also a one
going up one to the right. So that one up there.
This mass distribution here is just a copy of
this one, but it's suitably translated so that
it's centered at minus two. Now the next one is
zero. So this thing here has a weight of zero,
that means we have to take a copy of one of these
because it has weight to zero and translate it so
that it's centered at zero. Well, that's exactly
where it is already. So that means we have to
take this thing and basically just copy it
down here. So what does that mean? Well, under
minus one we have two. I'll do it
like that. Over one we have a one.
We've copied this thing so it's centered at zero.
Now in addition, we have to take this thing here
and we have to copy it so that it's centered at
one. But now we have to also double that mass
distribution because there's a factor or weight
of two here. So really we have to take two times
this thing and position it so that it's centered
at one. So let's do that. Let me take this thing
here, and I'm going to center it at one, but I'm
also going to multiply it by two. So this thing
here, which is a weight of sort of negative two,
is going to come down from here to weight minus
two, but then it's also going to keep going
exactly multiplied by two. So there's really
a weight of 4 there. That's centered at one.
Then on the right of that at two, we have to
also put one of these, but I also have to double
it, so not just one, I have to go up like this.
That's how we convolve things. We take a copy
of this thing and basically make copies of it
in various places determined by the positions
and the weights determined by this other one.
Let me just see if we get the same thing that we
did algebraically. So here there's a minus two
alpha to the minus three, yes. What about alpha
to the minus one? Well, you see here there's some
cancellation because there's sort of a positive
weight and there's also minus two weight, so the
total weight is minus one at minus one. So there's
a minus alpha minus one here, there's a weight of
minus four, here there's a weight of plus one, and
here there's a weight of two at alpha squared. So
that's the same thing that we would get. Now you
can convince yourself that this is the same thing
that we would get if we interchange the roles
of these two things. In other words, if we took
this thing and made copies of it according to the
weights and positions of these guys over here. So
I'll let you check that we're going to get the
same thing. This is showing you that in this
interpretation of having densities or measures,
the addition corresponds to just a cumulative
addition of these measures in the simplest
possible way, while the multiplication is
also attractive but corresponds to this
important operation called convolution,
which is important in engineering and analysis
and many things. It arises in many places,
but this is an elementary way that it arises when
we have this interpretation of these integral poly
numbers as densities or measures on this
discrete number line labeled by integers.
Now I want to suggest to you that this way of
thinking that I'm giving you here actually has a
really great consequence just a little bit further
down the road when we're in possession of rational
numbers. So currently we've got natural numbers
and integers. We don't have rational numbers yet,
but that will not be a big ask because we all
sort of know how to go from integers to rational
numbers in some fashion or another, in terms of
formal quotients or ordered pairs or something
like that. So that's not going to be too much
work. But once we do have rational numbers as
part of our number system here, then we're going
to be able to adopt this point of view exactly
that I'm expressing here in this video to really
expand our minds about the objects that we think
of in analysis in one way. We're going to be able
to think about them in a very different way from
an algebraic point of view. So once we extend our
number system to the rational numbers, then we can
make the following definition: that a rational
poly number is then an mset of rational numbers.
Kind of obviously. For example, here then is
an mset of rational numbers. So here's rational
number two-thirds, two-thirds, 15 over seven,
zero. These bars over here are just negative,
so this is negative two-thirds, negative
two-thirds, and this anti is the usual antis,
that's an anti-zero. In terms of a poly number or
a rational poly number, there's two of these minus
two-thirds, so that would correspond to, we would
write that down in alpha notation as 2 times alpha
to the minus two-thirds because there's two-thirds
appearing here. Actually, minus two-thirds appear
here, so we get alpha to the minus two-thirds,
two of them. There's a minus one because there's
an anti-zero, and this fifteen over seven
would correspond to alpha to the 15 over 7.
Think about this for a second. We are creating
these things as legitimate mathematical objects
without a prior theory of cube roots or
seventh roots. If you go into a first-year
calculus course and you say, what do we mean
by the function y equals x to the 15 over 7?
Well, that's not going to be so easy for them
to explain. They'll try to tell you that this
is a function that involves raising something
to the 15th power and also taking a one-seventh
root. Then you ask them, well, how do you take
a one-seventh root, and they go, I don't know,
you use a calculator. So that's the way they think
about it. They think this is something that inputs
a number and then you have to use a calculator
involving this rather complicated seventh root
operation in order to calculate the result.
What we're doing here is invoking this as a
legitimate mathematical object without any mention
of seventh roots or cube roots or anything else.
It's just a multi-set of rational numbers,
and it can be represented physically in a very
parallel way to what I've already explained.
It's just that now our number line is to be
thought of as being expanded, not just discrete
in terms of the natural numbers or the integers,
we're also considering rational number positions,
rational numbers completely obtainable in a
finite amount of way, no infinite processes or
dreaming required. So this thing here, well,
we just find the point minus two-thirds on our
number line somewhere between zero and minus one,
and over that point, well, there's two of these,
so we put a weight of two over minus two-thirds.
Anti, oh, here's zero, yes, here's zero, there's
minus one of them, so we put a weight of minus
one at zero, and over here, fifteen over
seven, it's a little bit more than two,
there's that point. Over that point,
we put a weight of one. So there it is,
there's no irrationalities involved here at all,
there's no irrationalities in sight whatsoever.
That is such an important point to make. We
are doing something different from what you
find in undergraduate courses. We're looking
at things from a different point of view.
It's all just msets. Now with this framework,
we're in a position to introduce something really
exciting, which is a fundamental symmetry in this
situation. Here's our number line: there's zero,
natural numbers over here, one, two, three,
negative numbers over here, minus one, minus two,
minus three. There is a symmetry here. We
can look this way, we can look this way,
they look pretty well the same in both directions,
just this is going to the right and this is going
to the left for you. It is the symmetry, that
reflection symmetry about this central point.
If you've been watching my math and music
series, I talk about symmetry in the piano
and the difference between translation
symmetry and reflection symmetry. It's
actually an important topic. This is an
example of where the reflection symmetry
about zero plays an important role. Typically
speaking, if we're thinking of a number line as
giving us positional information, we have
some physical structure and we want to
allocate positions to various things, maybe
it's a road and these are our street numbers,
or it's an industrial assembly line and here's
the various markers on the assembly line.
When we have that kind of thing, the translation
invariance is almost always more important than
the symmetry. But in this situation here, we're
looking at the number line as a representation
of this arithmetical structure. It's not just
positions we're talking about, we're talking about
having arithmetic here, and in arithmetic, zero
does play a very distinguished role. Zero is very
special, it's like the most important point on the
number line. So the symmetry about zero naturally
plays a role in arithmetic, as opposed to the
piano, you're not doing arithmetic on the keys,
you're just going up and down. It's the
translation invariance that's important.
So what we're going to do now is to look
carefully at this fundamental symmetry
that's appearing here, which is largely
invisible to undergraduates. Because
from an undergraduate point of view, as
we've talked about already, there's a big
difference between the function f of x equals
x and the function f of x equals 1 over x.
There's not a lot of similarity between
those two things. They're very different,
they look different, their graphs are different,
their integration theories are different, their
arc length formulas are completely different, etc.
But we're moving away from the calculus point and
just looking at this algebraic side of things,
and there the symmetry is really important. So an
example: here is an integral poly number weighted
one minus one, weight of minus one at one,
a weight of three at two. So it's alpha minus
1, minus alpha plus 3 alpha squared. Here is
this reflection symmetry, let's call it sigma.
Sigma, and what does this do? Well, it just
reflects everything around zero.
So that tower goes over there,
and this little underneath thing goes over on this
side, and this thing here goes on the other side.
Algebraically, what we do is we
just negate all the exponents,
so we're getting three alpha to the minus
two, minus alpha to the minus one, plus alpha.
More generally, sigma of alpha to the n
equals alpha to the minus n, and otherwise,
we're sort of using linearity to extend that
to more general poly numbers or I poly numbers.
Now this symmetry operation on integral poly
numbers satisfies a number of pleasant properties.
The first one is that it's an involution, that
if you do it twice, you get back to where you
started. You reflect and reflect again, you're
back to where you are. So sigma of sigma of p
equals p. It's linear, sigma of p plus q equals
sigma of p plus sigma of q. It's also linear in
the sense that if k is an integer, you multiply
a poly number by two and then reflect, well,
you're going to get twice the reflection of
the original. This one here is a little bit
more subtle: that's the sigma of a product is
the product of the sigmas. Sigma of pq equals
sigma of p times sigma of q. So this is a
pretty natural algebraic symmetry which is
in some sense at the heart of algebra when we
look at integral poly numbers in this fashion.
For our last slide, we're going to introduce
symmetric and alternating integral poly numbers.
We'll say that a poly number, an integral poly
number, is symmetric precisely when sigma of
p equals p. That means that when you look at it,
it's symmetric. Everything to the right looks very
much like everything to the left symmetrically. So
for example, this thing here, 2 times alpha to the
minus 3 minus 4 alpha to the minus 1 plus 1
minus 4 alpha plus 2 alpha cubed is symmetric.
Conversely, p is alternating, or maybe in some
other context, we could say skew-symmetric or
anti-symmetric. Let's use alternating when sigma
of p equals minus p, same as p bar. For example,
this one here, q equals three alpha to the
minus five minus alpha to the minus 1 plus alpha
minus 3 alpha to the five, this thing's
alternating because when you apply sigma,
you're going to get minus 3 alpha
to the minus 5 plus alpha inverse
minus alpha plus 3 alpha. You're going to
get exactly the negative of this thing.
So having this sigma reflection allows us
to identify two sort of interesting classes,
two particularly natural classes, of
integral poly numbers: the symmetric ones
and the alternating ones. In fact, there is
a nice way of cooking these up in quite great
generality. So if you have any integral poly
number p, then p plus sigma of p is symmetric,
whereas p minus sigma of p is
alternating. That's an easy check.
So now we're at the door of a kind of untold
chapter of algebra, a missing chapter of
algebra that probably you should have learned
about in grade nine or grade ten when you were
learning about polynomials. But at that time, you
thought that polynomials were only things that
you cooked up with positive powers of x or y or
whatever, but not from this larger point of view:
positive powers, negative powers. These things
are naturally viewed together. When we do that, we
come to this new chapter of algebra, which we're
going to start investigating next time, and there
will be all kinds of interesting consequences with
some actually quite sophisticated mathematics and
physics. Hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]